Title: Sandakphu Trek
Date: 2019-02-24
Tags: Travel, Env


Growing up I've always been interested in trekking; So, naturally when
a friend suggested that we should go for a trek in 2 018, I was kinda
skeptical and kinda excited. Skeptical mainly because it was a
significant amount of money including all the equipment I had to buy
for a high altitude trek in the winter; and excited because it was a
trek. My very first trek. I had a lot of expectations in my head.

## Why Sandakphu ? ##
My friend and me wanted to go for a different trek but we couldn't get
the booking in time. So we choose Sandakphu. Apart from that Sandakphu
was on our radar mainly because of the length of the trek and the good
reviews. Both of us wanted to do something that was a challenging and
lengthy so after Goechala; Sandakphu fit the bill perfectly.

## Preparation ##
The preparation of this trek involved two parts mainly. 

Firstly, I had to prepare myself physically for the trek. I was not
too worried about the physical part since I walk a lot on a regular
basis and I also started running after moving to Mumbai.

However for this trek I needed to buy some rather expensive equipment.
I needed to buy one rucksack, and some clothing for the low
temperature and shoes. The clothing was most important. I did not want
to buy something too expensive and too specialized that would be of
no use otherwise. 

Buying the rucksack was kinda easy. I bought a 60L pack. I really
wanted to buy a 70L one but with my history of efficient packing (this
one time I had 30 days worth of stuff in a 30L bag along with my work
laptop), the 60L one seemed perfect.

Buying the clothing was more fun! When you are selecting clothing for
treks, you want to be as efficient as possible because everything you
own, you have to carry it yourself. Furthermore, you want to use
layering to protect yourself. There are plenty of good websites online
that talk about layering (fyi. the layering information on IndiaHikes
site is shit and absolutely not reliable).

The layering can be quite complicated but ultimately it boils down to
minimizing loss of heat (clothes do not generate heat, instead they
keep you warm by minimizing heat loss). So I bought two polyester base
layers and one hollow-fill jacket from decathlon. The hollow-fill jacket
was good enough for heat but under certain extreme windy conditions I
did find it a bit too cold as it is not completely wind-proof. But it
was good enough for this trek.

For shoes I decided to rent a pair from IndiaHikes.

## The Trek ##
The trek was from 22nd to 28th of December. We picked this batch
hoping that we would get extreme cold temperature.


On 22nd we met the rest of the team the NJP station in West Bengal and
we started off to Jaubhari. Jaubhari is the IndiaHikes base camp for
the Sandakphu trek.  At Jaubhari we were briefed about the trek
leader. I was really surprised to know about the various activities
that IndiaHikes does on the mountains to make the treks more
sustainable. Someone from IndiaHikes also briefed the entire team
about the benefits of using menstrual cups which I found really cool!
After this out medical parameters were checked and recorded, followed
by some dinner. Jaubhari is at 2134 meters.

At Jaubhari we also received our rented equipment. I rented a shoe but
for some reason I could not feel comfortable in them. They felt
different. So against the advise of the trek leaders and other fellow
trekkers I decided to continue the trek in my regular shoes.

One 23rd, we reached Tumling which was at 2970 meters. The trek was
fun. We stopped in the middle of the trek for lunch. At Tumling the
temp was somewhere around 2-5 C.

On the way to Tumling the waist belt of a ruck sack got ripped. So at
tumling we managed to get hold of some needle and thread and stitched
the ripped belt. It was a hacky job but the belt worked till the last
day of the trek. 

The views were amazing. We got brilliant views of the mountains. On
the left we could see Mount Everest and on the right we could see the
Kanchenjunga Ranges.

![Everest](/assets/images/2019-02-24/everest.png)

##### Lhotse, Everest, Makalu peaks on the right.  #####

It was quite cold and I loved it. I went for a walk after dinner to
experience the cold and also to test my jacket. I did remove my jacket
for a bit and it got too cold too fast. The jacket was doing its job
perfectly and I was satisfied with my purchase. :-P

On 24th we reached Kalipokhri which is at 3170 meters. I do not
remember the details of this days trek. I do remember that at
Kalipokhri all of us gathered in the hut where we were supposed to
have dinner a all of us sang. It was a beautiful experience.

![Kanchenjunga](/assets/images/2019-02-24/kanchenjunga.png)

##### Kanchenjunga. #####

After dinner I headed out for another walk. It was super-cold and it
was super-windy. I could feel my legs starting to die (i did not carry
any layers for my legs).

On 25th we reached Sandakphu which was at 3577 meters. It was quite
cold, but the views were amazing. 

The trek to sandakphu was mostly thorough a motor-able road although
there were certain shortcuts which we obviously took. Wile trekking we
were also picking up small pieces of plastic. I managed to pick up a
used sanitary napkin (who the fuck throws a sanitary napkin out in the
wild). Anyway, I also managed to annoy a co-trekker when I was being
stupid and picked up a water bottle that was not in a safe position
(sorry!!).

We had some time to kill in Sandakphu so we all got together and sang
and played dumb charades. It was my turn and I froze completely
(again!!). At this point I should just stop playing these games.

We also saw the milky-way. This was the first time I was seeing the
Milky Way and it was amazing. :-)

On 26th, we left from Sandakphu and went to Sabargram located at 3600
meters. This place was really cold. I helped pitch some toilet tents. 

We also managed to do some amazing photography and got good shots of
the milky-way.

![camp](/assets/images/2019-02-24/camp.png)

##### This was our camp location at Sabargram. #####

On 27th we were supposed to reach Phalut which is at 3642 meters and
then descend back to Gorkhey which is at 2300 meters. This day was too
much fun. By the end of the trek I was running down the hill along
with our guide Buddha Ji.

There is a river flowing through Gorkhey and some of us went there to
dip our feet in the stream. I managed to slip and fall down into the
river; thankfully I did not get too wet otherwise I would be in
trouble. 

Me and an equally crazy co-trekker decided to compete about who can
keep their feet in the cold water for the longest time. I won that
competition. The water wasn't that cold.

As this was the second last day of the trek we all gathers in the
men's dorm and everyone shared small bits and pieces about what they
would be taking away from the trek. This was also amazing. So many
beautiful people pouring some parts of their heart out. :-)

28th marked the last day of the trek and quite possibly the last day
some of us would ever see each other again. We started off early in
the morning and we reached the final spot at Sepi well ahead of time. 

We had lunch and then we took vehicles to Jaubhari (base camp) where
we were supposed to return our rental equipment and pick up other
stuff for the journey back home.

The journey to Jaubhari wasn't too special, except everyone was tired
and I think everyone knew that the trek had already ended. It felt
kinda sad to realize that there was a very good chance that none of us
would see each other ever again.

The journey from Jaubhari to NJP was quite interesting. We had a train
to catch so we were under the clock. On top of that the weather got
significantly worse and it started snowing heavily. It was snowing so
much that we couldn't see the road ahead, thankfully though, the
driver of the jeep knew the route and he cold drive under those
conditions. I puked on the way (Is it really trekking if you don't
puke). We reached the railway station to find that the train was
delayed. We all said our goodbyes and promised to stay in touch. 

And that was it. My first trek had ended. :-)

![group](/assets/images/2019-02-24/team.jpg)

##### The entire group for the trek. #####

## What does trekking mean for me ? ##

I like being self-reliant. I get a lot of pleasure out of doing
everything I need myself. It's about being able to solve my own
problems myself and also understand how the world works in some small
narrow way.

I also believe in owning less and living a simple, minimalist and
sustainable life. I do not care for the luxuries of life and the
ultimate target would be to carve a life in which I do not own
anything I do not need.

I also enjoy solitude more than the average human being I think. I
also enjoy walking a lot. Walking helps me orient myself in some sort
of way. Whenever I am having trouble deciding something, or I can not
understand something I am studying or I start feeling lonely, I go for
a walk. I enjoy the conversations I have with myself during these
walks. I walk to unwind after a stressful day. It's not too uncommon
to find me walking home after work.

Trekking is something that ties all of this together in some weird sort
of way.

There is something thrilling about carrying everything you *think*
you can need in a bag and walk into the wilderness. Now, the trek was
not like "walking into the wilderness"; in-fact far from it actually,
but I guess this is the beginning. I would actually love to trek in a
completely un-supported fashion but right here, right now, its not
feasible. 

That's it. Thanks for reading. :-)

I will end this with a picture of me. 
![ME](/assets/images/2019-02-24/me.jpg)
