Title: Instant Messaging et. al.
Date: 27-4-2019
Tags: Meta
Status: draft

About 2 weeks ago I decided to uninstall WhatsApp (which happens to be
the most used IM application by myself) from my phone. This was a
decision that was many weeks into the making. I will share my
experience and the motivation below. There is a very big possibility
that I have over thought the shit out of a simple thing, so don't take
my word for it. Whatever I have written below is my thought on this
and completely based on my experience and even though I have done some
research, I am far from being authoritative on this topic. That said,
if I am wrong then please reach out and help me understand this
better.

Before that, let's look at how WhatsApp is designed and how it
encourages a specific type of usage.

## The urgency of Instant Messaging ##

WhatsApp is what we call an Instant Messaging Application. The idea
being that you can reach anyone, anywhere instantly. 

The key word here is the "instant" part, and there is very specific
set of features that these apps use to enforce that. After all, it's in
the apps best interest to keep the user on the app for the maximum
amount of time. The use of "Last seen", "online/typing", read receipts
etc all work together to create an environment where there is an
innate sense of urgency.

I would expect instant replies to my messages. This got too weird too
fast.  There would be times when I would check the online/typing
status and get pissed if someone was online but not replying.

Notice how selfish and negative this line of thinking is for it
completely ignores the fact that the other person is human being who
has some work other than replying to my messages and instead focuses
only on, "they got my message (i can see double ticks), they saw my
message (the ticks are blue), they are online (it shows online), but
they are not replying for whatever reason."

Moreover this is not how a real human conversation works. In my
opinion emails and IRC have done a much better job of human
communication. With emails there is not expectation of instant replies
and with IRC you are part of the conversation as long as you are
signed-in to the chat room.

## The human-ness in communication is lost ##
Communication is a very human phenomenon, however communicating via IM
reduces the experience of communication to just some exchange of text
messages and maybe some emojis. Human communication isn't that
shallow.

When we talk with someone face-to-face or via a phone call it's not
just the normal exchange of words, but at the same time there are
multiple other cues (for lack of a better word) that are communicated
and interpreted.

Cues like, how was the sentence spoken, was it too fast or too slow,
how did they speaker sound, which syllable did they stress on, how was
their expression, body language, what were they doing with their feet,
their hands, was there eye-contact, etc etc. All of this is missing
from IM.

The lack of these ques increases the ambiguity in a conversation which
makes it incredibly hard for me as an individual to judge the tone of
the conversation. I've been told in various ways that I ask a lot of
questions precisely because I ask a lot of questions just to judge the
tone of the conversation. This includes multiple hours of agony
thinking "Did they mean it like this or like that ?" etc etc. Also,
its weird that some people (read. most of them) do not really reply to
all the questions you ask in a big message but anyway idk. :-

Personally, I enjoy the weird laughter, the "umms" and the "hmms", the
random hand movements etc etc that we get to experience in a real
conversation.

## Different persona ##
Over the internet it is much easier to be a completely different
version of yourself. A lot of communication is context and since that
is essentially absent from IM, it leaves a lot of room for
interpretation on both the sending and the receiving end.

Furthermore, since the lack of human-ness also acts as a shield since
you don't have to deal with the actual human. So you can say anything
you want without facing the full consequences of it. This makes it very
easy to say certain things both good and bad. 

I've experienced that it's much easier to offer a incredibly
non-constructive criticism over the internet (i.e. something that does
not do the other person any good but makes them feel like shit), while
its also incredibly easy to say something very encouraging to
someone. Try saying "I believe in you" to someone face-to-face. Its
terrifying, but at the same time its much more rewarding if you can
actually do it.


### I have royally fucked up my attention span ###
I'm always online. It's an integral part of my work, my studies etc
etc. This means that I am also very very over-stimulated, like all the
time.

A large part of my work necessitates that I be able to context switch
between different completely different tasks very quickly, so being
able to switch laser focus from one task to another for a small amount
of time and then again switch back is vital. At work, at any point of
time I generally work on a long term agenda (like weekly work-goal), a
short term critical bug-fix, personal side-project (like this blog)
and studying. Apart from this I have at least two IM applications open
at the same time and I am interacting with at least 4 groups on a
regular basis (work group, meetup group, NGO etc etc).

What this means is that I have a ton of hard time trying to focus on
something. Things have gotten so bad that I find it difficult to sit
through an entire movie without wither skipping the "slow" parts or
speeding the movie up. I find YouTube videos too slow at the "normal"
pace and hence I speed it up to 1.75x now. I started with 1.25x about
3 months ago.

Things aren't that bad though. I find myself able to focus only when
the problem at hand is too critical or too challenging or when I am
speaking with someone. Anything less that and my mind starts to
wander. Needless to say it is difficult for me to sit down and study
stuff as well.

It's a shit show in my head. Need to fix it.

### The fragility and plasticity of human communication ###
Human communication has always been very fragile. Fragile in a sense
that, once a conversation between two people are over it exists only
in the minds of the participants which in the long term can cause the
memory of that conversation to morph into something else entirely so
much so that different participants have completely different
recollections of the same conversation. Memory is plastic after-all
(and there is a lot of research to prove this)

This also means that people forget things that they talked about from
time to time and this is normal. The brain does a regular clean-up job
when we sleep deleting the less important stuff while stashing the
more imp stuff (watch Inside Out). For me personally I tend to
remember some weird detail that no one cares about in a
conversation. etc etc.

Initially this used to be very annoying but over time I realized that
this is a very important feature of human communication. This
forget-able-ness is the reason why it feels so good when a very old
friend brings up a very old topic.

With IM applications everything is permanent. There is no ambiguity as
to what was said, but at the same time there is no context information
also. 

Also, when people forget conversations, it's actually fun because you
get to have the same conversations again with them. 

### Notes to self ###
I called up a bunch of people and that was amazing. Should do that more often.

I did not miss WhatsApp as much as I thought I would.

There are certain people with whom WhatsApp is the only mode of
communication. So, can't really do anything about it.

And most importantly, there are certain people with whom the
experience on IM is phenomenal. My best guess would be that these
people experience IMs the same way I do (to some extent) and hence our
conversations are somewhat better. So. yeah! 

I hope this makes sense.
