Title: The Quest for Truth; and other things
Date: 2019-11-24
Tags: Meta


I've been an inquisitive kid when I was young. I remember picking up
random things and asking endless series of questions etc etc. I still
do all those. I can be relentless when it comes to looking for answers
that do not satisfy my internal metric for truth.

This was partially inspired by a episode 41 (Belief) from the
philosophize this podcast, and partially about certain things that I
have observed in myself, but did not really want to address/accept.

> ###### Everything that follows is what I think and this is true for me at this point in time and space. There is a very good chance that the definition will evolve and grow ######

# What is truth and how to find it ?

There is no objective truth. There is no objective truth because I as
a human being do not have complete information about the world.

You almost never have full information hence you will never find the
ultimate truth. This however does not mean that you should stop
looking. In fact, far from it actually. I would argue that the fact
that there is no ultimate truth, makes it all the more valuable to
keep looking for it.

Imagine how boring it would be to live in a world with a finite amount
of truth in it. Once you have figured out a that amount of truth, there
would be nothing left to do because you have figured it all out.

Having no definitive truth makes life interesting, for there is always
something new to learn; something new to find out. Moreover, having
partial truths is better than not having any truths in the first
place.


# The internal Truth Police and skepticism #

I have an internal metric for truth. This means that if some
hypothesis does not reconcile with my metric for truth then I find it
very difficult to accept. This often manifests in the form of
dissatisfaction from a proposed solution to a problem at work or not
trusting a narrative until a convincing argument is presented, etc
etc. Needless to say this makes me quite obnoxious and a difficult
person at times.

I've been reading a bunch of old philosophy and I one school of
thought that I find myself agreeing with a lot is is skeptics (and the
stoics as well). I would argue that this skepticism is good. It keeps
me on my toes and I can see bullshit from half a mile away. This habit
has made me take myself and my beliefs very seriously as well.

It has also made me very very skeptical of grand claims that seem too
good to be true. After all, there is no free lunch, and everything has
a cost.

# Belief #

During growing up, I learnt very early on that most of the things that
my family told me about how the world works is False. 

The biggest of these experiences were when I was moving to Bangalore
and everyone I knew in Kolkata told me that South India was a weird
place. Their food, their language and their customs are different and
they are very racist towards outsiders. My personal experience was much
different and exactly the opposite. There was a similar mismatch
between what people said and how my experience was when I travelled to
Chennai alone using public transport. The point is, I learnt to
skeptical about everything I hear early on and that has consumed
certain other parts of my life.

In the podcast we talk about how Belief and truth are two different
things. When you think about it, it makes sense. After all, just
because you believe in something does not mean that it has to be
true. So, how do you make sure that your beliefs are as close to the
truths as possible ?

In the podcast the host says that one way to make sure that your
beliefs are as close to the truth as possible is by scrutinizing your
beliefs in the most ruthless and the most thorough manner
possible. Now, this is not an easy work. Moreover, this is not a
one-off task. It's a lifelong endeavour. Pledging your allegiance to
the Truth means that you have a lifelong responsibility to make sure
that your beliefs are as closer to the truth as possible.

The aim is to as intellectually rigorous as possible.

# Kindness and Empathy #

In this process to find the closest truth one can often become quite
unkind, both to one's self and to other people. This is something that
I am guilty of myself and I am trying my best to get better at being
kind.

I will with a quote -
> Doubt is not a pleasant Condition but Certainty is absurd. - Voltaire
